I have long held the belief that you must change the way you do things if you want different results. Partly, because I took Einstein’s quote a little too far: “Insanity is doing the same thing over and over and expecting different results.” And partly because I was fixated on a single variable or factor, which is the process itself. However, as I read, learn, and experience more, I became aware of other variables like the environment you’re playing in or the social network you’re associated with. This little observation made me realize how doing the same exact thing can be transformative to one’s life.

Imagine you are a studious and smart student at your high school in North Korea, and you viewed some foreign documentary on TV because you have no access to the Internet, and you dream of becoming a scientist that helps advance humanity. There are many obstacles with your vision. First, becoming a scientist in North Korea means you will be working against humanity – by developing mass destruction weapons – and second, it would be incredibly hard to get a decent higher education unless you’re among the elite. So, the obvious but less practical solution is to flee the country – your environment – to have a better shot at your goal.

Let’s take a real-world example. In my sophomore year in high school, I stumbled upon this “rags to riches” story in the local journal of Miloud Chaabi, at the time the country’s richest person. Miloud was born into poverty in a little mountainous village and had access to limited schooling. Very unfavorable circumstances, but he was smart and determined to make it in the country with one change of variable. He tried several domains starting with agriculture in the city he moved to first, Marrakesh, but nothing worked to the level he wanted. This made him change the environment by moving to another city, Kenitra, at age 15. Here, he noticed the fast growth of the construction sector and started working at the lowest level, learning until he founded his first company at 18.

Sometimes, all it takes is one little change in the factors to be able to succeed. This change of environment may not work in certain fields like science; you can’t expect different results from the same chemical experiment using the same method and tools in the UK. But it can work in business.
